leafdigital Optical media checker
---------------------------------

Copyright 2011 Samuel Marshall

Released under GNU Public License v3 (see LICENSE)


What this does
--------------

This app reads all the files on a DVD-R or other optical disc. This will
show up any disc errors and tell you if the DVD-R has reached the end of
its useful life.

In its current version, this app runs only on Mac OS X (10.5 required).


Background
----------

When you store important files on optical disc, you should make at least
two copies using discs from different suppliers. You should check these
discs regularly because optical discs can lose information over time. If
a disc has lost information, duplicate it from the other copy using new
media.

This app is designed to let you verify your discs with as little effort as
possible.


Getting the app
---------------

1) Download the DMG file from the Downloads button.

2) Open the DMG.

3) Drag the app into your Applications folder or another location.


How to use
----------

1) Run the app.

2) Put an optical disc into any optical drive attached to your computer.

3) Checking starts automatically as soon as the operating system recognises
   the disc.

4) When the check finishes, the disc will be ejected. 

5) Put in the next disc you want to check, or quit the program if you have
   finished.


Interface details
-----------------

The program shows a box for each disc being checked. Usually, this box will
be replaced when you put the next disc in, but if there are errors, the box
stays up. (To get rid of error boxes, close the program and run it again.)

If there are errors, all the files that failed to copy are listed in the
scrolling box. Should you wish to copy this list to another program, select
all the lines in the box (using shift-click) and then press Command+C to
copy.
   
If you have more than one optical drive you can check multiple discs at once
(just put discs into each drive as required) although I haven't tested this
because the internal drive inside my Mac Mini is knackered.


Tips
----

Please DO NOT CONTACT ME for advice restoring data from damaged discs. I
don't care how important it is - there is absolutely no chance that I'll
be able to help. 

Here is literally everything I know about it:

- Sometimes different drives are better at reading discs than others. Try
  a few drives.
  
- It might be possible to find software that reads discs repeatedly or at
  a low level or something in order to extract the data, but I don't know
  about this.
  
- There are companies which offer extremely expensive data retrieval
  services, but I don't know about these.

If you have vitally important information you should probably keep more than
two copies on disc or else use disc copies in conjunction with a third backup
mechanism (e.g. two copies on disc, one on external HD or in cloud storage).


Troubleshooting
---------------

If the app breaks oddly, check standard error in console; I didn't bother
to code a proper way to display some errors.

It uses the 'diskutil' program internally, so if Apple change the command line
or return syntax for that program in a future OS version, it will break.

Tested on OS X 10.6.7 only.


Build instructions
------------------

If you want to build this project, download the source using Git or the
GitHub download option.

Once you have downloaded the source, just change to the directory with this
file in and run 'ant'. The default build.xml file will build the DMG file.

Examine build.xml if you want to change where it puts temporary data or the
resulting output files.


Documentation
-------------

Not a lot, sorry, but the app is very simple...


Repository information
----------------------

In case you're not reading it there, the hosting site for this project is:

http://github.com/quen/opticalchecker

There you can do the following:

* Download the full source code (click the Download Source button or use Git).
* Download the latest binary version (click the Downloads button).
* Report bugs or contribute improvements (click the Issues tab).


Acknowledgements
----------------

Icon based on http://www.openclipart.org/detail/104191 by 'decosigner',
noted on that page as public domain.

Tick mark in the image is from some font or other.

All other work by me.
